CHAPTER I The vision of Isaiah, the son of Amoz, which
concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah kings of Judah.
Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord hath spoken. I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me. The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's
crib, but Israel doth not know. My people doth not consider. Ah, sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters. They have forsaken the Lord,
they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger. They are gone away backward.
Why should ye be stricken any more? Ye will revolt more and more. The whole head is sick,
and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in
it but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores. They have not been closed, neither bound up,
neither mollified with ointment. Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire,
your land strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate as overthrown by strangers.
And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers,
as a besieged city. Except the Lord of Host had left unto us a very small remnant,
we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom, give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of
Gomorrah. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me, saith the Lord?
I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts, and I delight not in the blood
of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats. When ye come to appear before me, who hath required
this at your hand to tread my cords? Bring no more vain oblations. Incense is an abomination unto me.
The new moons and Sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with. It is iniquity,
even the solemn meeting. Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth.
They are a trouble unto me. I am weary to bear them. And when ye spread forth your hands,
I will hide mine eyes from you. Yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear. Your hands are full
of blood. Wash you. Make you clean. Put away the evil of your doings, from before mine eyes cease
to do evil. Learn to do well. Seek judgment. Relieve the oppressed. Judge the fatherless.
Plead for the widow. Come now, let us reason together, saith the Lord. Though your sins be
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land. But if ye refuse and rebel,
ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.
How is the faithful city becoming harlot? It was full of judgment. Righteousness lodged in it.
But now murderers. Thy silver is become dross. Thy wine mixed with water. Thy princes are
rebellious and companions of thieves. Everyone loveth gifts and followeth after rewards. They judge
not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore saith the Lord,
the Lord of hosts, the mighty one of Israel, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me
of mine enemies. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all
thy men. And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning.
Afterward thou shalt be called the city of righteousness, the faithful city. Zion shall
be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness. And the destruction of the transgressors
and of the sinners shall be together. And they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed.
For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the
gardens that ye have chosen. For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that
hath no water. And the strong shall be as toe, and the maker of it as a spark. And they shall
both burn together, and none shall quench them. Chapter 2. The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz
saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain
of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above
the hills, and all the nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go, and say, Come ye,
and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob. And he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people.
And they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks. Nations shall
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. O house of Jacob, come ye,
let us walk in the light of the Lord. Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob,
because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like the Philistines,
and they please themselves in the children of strangers. Their land also is full of silver and
gold, neither is there any end of their treasures. Their land is also full of horses, neither is there
any end of their chariots. Their land is also full of idols. They worship the work of their own hands,
that which their own fingers have made. And the mean man boweth down, and the great man
humbleth himself. Therefore forgive them not. Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust,
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled,
and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day.
For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty,
and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low, and upon all the cedars of Lebanon
that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Basian, and upon all the high mountains,
and upon all the hills that are lifted up, and upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall,
and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.
And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low,
and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. And the idols he shall utterly abolish,
and they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth,
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the
earth. In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made
each one for himself to worship, to the moles, and to the bats, to go into the clefts of the rocks,
and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty,
when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
for wherein is he to be accounted of? Chapter 3 For behold, the Lord, the Lord of hosts,
doth take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah, the stay, and the staff, the whole stay of bread,
and the whole stay of water, the mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet,
and the prudent, and the ancient, the captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the counselor,
and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator, and I will give children to be their princes,
and babes shall rule over them, and the people shall be oppressed every one by another,
and every one by his neighbor, the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient,
and the base against the honorable. When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of
his father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand.
In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be in healer, for in my house is neither bread,
nor clothing, make me not a ruler of the people. For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah has fallen,
because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory.
The show of their countenance doth witness against them, and they declare their sin as
sodom they hided not. Woe unto their soul, for they have rewarded evil unto themselves.
Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their
doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given
him. As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people,
they which lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths. The Lord standeth
up to plead, and standeth to judge the people. The Lord will enter into judgment with the
ancients of his people, and the princes thereof, for ye have eaten up the vineyard. The spoil of
the poor is in your houses. What mean ye, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces
of the poor, saith the Lord God of hosts? Moreover, the Lord saith, because the daughters of Zion are
haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go,
and making a tinkling with their feet. Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the
head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will discover their secret paths. In that day, the Lord
will take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their calls,
and their round tires like the moon, the chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,
the bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earrings,
the rings, and the nose jewels, the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples,
and the crisping pins, the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the veils.
And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink,
and instead of a girdle a rent, and instead of well-set hair baldness, and instead of a
stomacher a girding of sackcloth, and burning instead of beauty. Thy men shall fall by the sword,
and thy mighty in the war, and her gates shall lament and mourn,
and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground.